


Tracking information:
|IHE Domain                          |Patient Care Devices                |
|Change Proposal ID:                 |CP-PCD-081-00                       |
|Change Proposal Status:             |Ballot                              |
|Date of last update:                |2012-06-08                          |
|Person assigned:                    |John Rhoads                         |

Change Proposal Summary information:
|Clarify treatment of time in TF vol. 2                                    |
|Submitter’s Name(s) and e-mail      |John Rhoads                         |
|address(es):                        |                                    |
|Submission Date:                    |2012-06-08                          |
|Integration Profile(s) affected:    |General                             |
|Actor(s) affected:                  |General                             |
|IHE Technical Framework or          |IHE Patient Care Device (PCD)       |
|Supplement modified:                |Technical Framework; Volume 2;      |
|                                    |Revision 1.0; August 12, 2011       |
|Volume(s) and Section(s) affected:  |Vol. 2, Section B.7.1               |
|Rationale for Change:                                                     |
|Some implementers found the stipulations about time representation in     |
|observation messages unclear. This CP is a response to questions.         |


Apply changes to the text of Appendix B.7.1 as follows. Insertions
indicated by bold type, deletions indicated by crossed out words.

       B.7.1Time Stamps and Time Synchronization

Medical device data observations conveyed by the IHE PCD DEC Technical
Frameworks should where feasible use ‘consistent time’ for MSH-7, OBR-7,
OBR-8 and OBX-14, where ‘consistent time’ is based on a known reference
time source such as NTP or similar service.  Since medical devices may use
local clocks that are not synchronized to ‘consistent time’, a standardized
representation for disclosing how the device time(s) were mapped to
‘consistent time’ is required to provide traceability between the two.

In order to facilitate the correlation of transmitted observations, each
observation should contain a time stamp from a consistent, isochronous time-
base, either by default reference to [OBR-7, OBR-8) or by an overriding
value in OBX-14.  Since many medical devices have only a sense of local
time, and this local time may not be equivalent to the local time of the
DOR, it is a responsibility of the DOR to ensure the reported times within
an Observation Result message are consistent.  This means that all
observation times reported SHOULD be UTC, as indicated by including a time
zone offset of +0000, but it is permissible to use local time with the
required correct time zone offset included in the timestamp representation
since this can readily be converted to UTC whatever the time zone of the
receiving system.  However, iIn order to preserve the original time marking
provided by the device, the Observation Result message SHALL contain a
synchronization time element such as MDC_ATTR_TIME_ABS at the Medical
Device System level which discloses both the device’s notion of time and
the corresponding ‘consistent time’ (UTC) of the DOR, as described in the
following table. The DOR SHALL use this device time as the basis for
correcting the timestamps from the device (for example, for OBX-14) to the
DOR’s ‘consistent time’.



 | | | | | | | |Msg Segment |Description and comments |Status | | | | | | |
| | |MSH...... |MSH-7 Date/Time of Message created/sent (DTMDOR) |M | | | |
| | | | | |PID...... | |M | | | | | | | | | |OBR...... |[OBR-7, OBR-8)
Default time interval for child OBXs (DTMDOR) |M | | | | | | | | | |OBX..
0.0.0.1 |MDC_TIME_SYNC_PROTOCOL  (time sync protocol used by the DOR) |O |
| | | | | | | | |OBX.. 0.0.0.2 |MDC_TIME_ACCURACY  (known or estimated
accuracy of DOR time) |O | | | | | | | | | |OBX.. 1 |MDS for device #1 |M |
| | | | | | | | |OBX.. 1.0.0.1 |MDC_TIME_CAP_STATE  (BITS-16, using
MdsTimeCapState) |O | | | | | | | | | |OBX.. 1.0.0.2
|MDC_TIME_SYNC_PROTOCOL  (from nom-part-infrastructure) |O | | | | | | | |
| |OBX.. 1.0.0.3 |MDC_TIME_SYNC_ACCURACY  (device absolute time accuracy)
|O | | | | | | | | | |OBX.. 1.0.0.4 |MDC_ATTR_TIME_ABS (displayed time) and
OBX-14 (DTMDOR) |C[1] | | | | | | | | | |OBX.. 1.0.0.5 |MDC_ATTR_TIME_REL
(relative time) and OBX-14 (DTMDOR) |C | | | | | | | | | |OBX.. 1.0.0.6
|MDC_ATTR_TIME_HI_RES (hi-res rel time) and OBX-14 (DTMDOR) |C | | | | | |
| | | |OBX.. 1.0.0.7 |OBX-14 (DTMDOR, optional, overrides default (OBR-7,
OBR-8] time interval | | | | | | | | | | |OBX.. 1.0.0.7.1 |OBX-14 | | | | |
| | | | | |OBR...... |[OBR-7, OBR-8)  Default time interval for child OBXs
(DTMDOR) |M | | | | | | | | | |OBX.. 2 |MDS for device #2 |M | |Notes:

Status column gives Presence Qualifier, M: mandatory, O: option, C:
conditional.

The dotted numbers represent the object hierarchy value of OBX-4 and are
provided as example values only.

a.    DTMDOR is the datetime of the DOR, reported with an HL7 V2.6
‘date/time’ data type.  A time stamp resolution of at least one second and
a time zone offset are required, e.g., YYYYMMDDHHMMSS[.S[S[S[S]]]]+/-ZZZZ
(required items shown in bold font).

b.    Within the time scope of each OBR and the time interval expressed in
[OBR-7, OBR-8), time discontinuities in the MDC_ATTR_TIME_ABS displayed
time are prohibited.  Discontinuities due to daylight savings or other
clock adjustments require that data on the new displayed timeline shall be
sent as a separate OBR.

c.    The OBR establishes the default time context for all its child OBXs,
but can be overridden by a time stamp in OBX-14.

d.    The time interval specified by [OBR-7, OBR-8) is a mathematically
‘closed’ interval for OBR-7 and ‘open’ for OBR-8.  A datum that occurs
exactly at the time specified by OBR-8 would be sent in the next time
epoch.  This allows subsequent OBR segments to represent a continuous
sequence of time.  For encoding a simple set of episodic measurement, if
there is no logical "end" of the observation period, OBR-8 may be set to
the message creation time to indicate the logical upper limit for the
contained observations.



HL7 time stamps sent in MSH-7, OBR-7, OBR-8 and OBX-14 should in most
situations be ‘consistent time’ based on NTP or any other reference time
source that provides traceability to NTP when this is feasible. As a
consequence, it is strongly encouraged that the gateway or application
device (AHD) support synchronized time as an NTP or SNTP (or other time
service) client so that it can (1) apply consistent time stamps to the data
reported over the WAN interface and (2) provide a time synchronization
service to the agents connected to it.

The MDC_ATTR_TIME_ABS (in OBX-3) observation provides traceability between
the displayed time shown on the device, as a DTM datatype in OBX-5, and the
corresponding gateway or AHD time reported in OBX-14.  Using an OBX to
report this as an observation of the time correlation is much simpler than
attempting to use other HL7 V2 message segments such as TQ1 or TQ2, which
are intended more for scheduling and expressing periodic time points.

The MDC_ATTR_TIME_REL and MDC_ATTR_TIME_HI_RES (in OBX-3) observations
provide traceability between the relative or hi-resolution relative values,
reported as an integer value in OBX-5, and the corresponding AHD time
reported in OBX-14.  The units-of-measure are μs or ms, expressed as MDC
units.


-----------------------






